Narrator: After helping to push off the boat he lingered on the shore as if sorry to see his new friends go. As the canoe was swiftly borne downstream he called some sort of a goodbye in his own language and started to climb the steep, rocky slope beside the waterfall. At the top of the fall he turned and waved, then was gone. It seemed foolish for three men to feel lonely when one had gone. They still looked back at the edge of the waterfall. Napo was the only one of their party who had really known this jungle. Now they were starting into country from which no foreigner had ever come back. Roger was the first one to snap out of it; he was not old enough to realize how much it meant. He had more confidence in his father and brother than they had in themselves.

Roger: I think Nosey wants something to eat. 

Narrator: He said. Because of its prominent proboscis and its way of poking its inquisitive trunk into everything and everybody, the little tapir had been nicknamed Nosey. 

Roger: ‘What does a tapir eat?’

Hunt: ‘All sorts of leaves and shoots and juicy vegetable matter, ‘But a baby tapir should have milk. Since there is no milk, you might try some very tender grass.’ 

Narrator: Dad said. They passed close enough to the bank for Roger to seize a handful of fresh young grass and he offered this dainty to Nosey.Nosey turned up his nose at it, or would have, except that the nose was of the permanently turned-down variety.

Hunt: ‘Now, you’re not going to be a problem child’ 

Narrator: John Hunt said reprovingly. Nosey at once proceeded to be a problem child by attempting to jump overboard, but was drawn back by the harness that had been made for him out of lianas.

Hunt: ‘Perhaps we'll just have to let him live on his own fat for a while until he decides to eat’

Narrator: and he turned to something of more immediate importance. He took out pad, pencil and compass.

Hal: ‘Going to map the river?’

Hunt: ‘Yes. Would you like to help?’

Hal: ‘Let me do it and you help’ 

Narrator: Hal ventured. He could think of nothing more thrilling than to chart the course of an unknown river. John Hunt smiled indulgently. 

Hunt: ‘Well, I’m sure you can do it’ 

Narrator: and he passed over the materials.Hal’s eyes sparkled. 

Hal: ‘Now, we begin with the fall — right? Has it a name?’

Hunt: ‘Not that I know of.’

Hal: ‘What shall we call it?’ 

Narrator: He thought of it as they had seen it, with Napo on its crest waving goodbye. 

Hal: ‘Napo Falls. How’s that?’

Hunt: ‘As good as anything.’

Narrator: Hal made a mark at the top of the pad and wrote ‘Napo Falls’. Then he began to trace the river. The paper was blue lined in squares, each representing a square mile. Hal estimated the distance back to the waterfall and the distance forward to the next large bend. He consulted the compass to get the direction correct. He had often watched surveyors at work.

Hal: ‘I wish we had all the proper instruments,’ 

Narrator: he said.

Hal: They’d be too bulky to take on a trip like this. If we come out with a roughly accurate map, that will encourage surveying parties to come in and complete the job.’